Tips for Success
================
Gabriel Butler, UCLA Global Classroom

**1. Write your code from scratch.**

If you write your own code from the beginning, once you finally get it
working, you’ll probably understand how every single line of it works,
and you’ll be able to use this wisdom later when you’re trying to solve
new problems. If you just copy and paste code from the tutorials and try
to edit it until it works, you’ll make lots of avoidable mistakes and
this will prolong your work process. In the long run, your programming
instincts will be much weaker and this will make you less productive and
less sucessful as a programmer.

**2. Write your code a few lines at a time.**

Start by writing just enough to get some of your code working,
regardless of what you’re trying to do. Then keep adding to it until the
next part works, and so on and so forth until your task is complete.

**3. Write your code in R scripts instead of just using the console.**

This makes it easier to keep track of your code as you modify it. It is
much easier to scroll through an R script than it is your console
history. Also, R only saves console history for one session at a time.
This means that if you don’t save your code somewhere and then you close
RStudio, your code will be lost forever.

If you write code down in a script, RStudio will also save it as part of
your project so you won’t lose it if RStudio freezes or crashes for some
reason. This will happen even if the script itself is not saved.

This means that while you’re working on your code for a lab, you should
open a new R script together with your RMarkdown document. Copy code
from your R script into your RMarkdown document when you think it’s
ready for submission.

R scripts will not be evaluated. But using them will make it easier for
you to do your work.

**3. Don’t copy and paste other people’s code into your own programs.**

It’s pretty much never a good idea to copy and paste somebody else’s
code into your own program. The other person’s code may have things in
it that you think will be useful for your own program. But blindly
copying and pasting somebody else’s code into your own program and
hoping that this will make your program start to work will only
disappoint and frustrate you.

And of course there’s also the issue of plagiarism. Coding is hard work,
and no one likes it when something they’ve worked hard on gets stolen.

**4. Try to learn from other people’s code.**

Sometimes you’ll come across code which will make you say, “I wish I
knew how to do that\!” Bookmark the page where you found it. Copy and
paste the code into a script to study later. Try to think of ways that
you can incorporate those cool tricks into your own work. And never stop
doing this.

**5. Search the internet for coding tips when you get stuck.**

If you’re thinking about a career that involves data analysis or writing
computer code in some way, you will have to do this a lot no matter how
good you get. Adapting tips that you find on the internet into solutions
to problems you face as a programmer will be very hard at first, but
you’ll get better and better at it with practice.

**6. Search the internet if you don’t understand an error message that R
returns.**

Sometimes error messages are impossible to interpret on their own
because their wording is too vague or too technincal. But if you copy
and paste these messages into Google, you can find discussions that
people have had about them. By reading these discussions, you can find
out what these messages mean in plain English. Hopefully this will help
you figure out how to stop getting that error message.

**7. Read the help files for functions you’re having trouble using.**

Make sure you’re entering values for all the mandatory arguments for a
given function. Also make sure you read about what the optional
arguments are used for. You may want to modify some of those optional
arguments later. And you may have to modify some of them to get your
code working in exactly the way you want.

**8. Tinker, experiment, explore\! Never stop learning\!**

It takes a lot of practice to become good at programming, so try to look
for opportunities to do it. This could be as simple as making up extra
questions for yourself to extend a lab assignment on your own. It could
be as complex as learning how to perform something called web scraping
so that you can collect your own data from websites that contain
information that interests you but is not yet in a readily analyzable
format. You can also read books like *Data Science with R* by Hadley
Wickham for a much broader overview of what’s possible with this
language.

Just remember that regardless of how good you get at any type of
programming, this is a field that is always rapidly advancing and you
will always have to keep learning new things in order to keep up with
trends.
